Amen, please be seated.
Now, if you have a Bible, let me invite you to turn with me to Ephesians.
Ephesians chapter two, verses four, three, six.
I wrote you a note because I don't think I could speak out loud.
And now we'll see how this earth goes.
It's been since before Christmas that we were in Ephesians together.
So we're returning to a study that may not be on our minds.
And so I want to remind you and reorient you just for a moment.
In chapters one to three, the apostle is telling Christians what God did for them in his grace.
how he has blessed us in Jesus.
And in chapters four to six, he's telling Christians then how we should live by God's grace as we respond in gratitude.
So big picture, grace chapters one to three, gratitude chapters four to six.
Or if you like Christian doctrine, Christian truth and Christian living.
Now,
We don't live for God in order to be graced by God, but we are graced by God and His grace is to bear fruit in how we live.
So that's big picture.
In chapters, let's think about one and two for a moment and catch up to where we are in verses 3 to 14.
Paul
blesses the God who blesses us with every spiritual blessing in Christ Jesus.
It's a long prayer of praise and adoration.
And then in verses 15 to 23, he prays for the Ephesians really ultimately that they would know and be convinced of and even experience the truth of these blessings in their lives.
It's one thing to be blessed by God with every spiritual blessing, and every believer is so blessed.
God hasn't left one of us out, but it is another thing to be convinced in your heart that you are so blessed.
And not every believer is so convinced.
So the apostle prays that God would, as we'll pray in a moment, enlighten the eyes of our hearts and the knowledge of Christ that we would know
the hope to which we've been called.
What are the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints?
And what is his exceedingly great power he has exercised towards us, that power that he exercised toward Christ and raising him from the dead and seeding him above all things?
And so we're in chapter two.
And in chapter two, the apostle
really reminds Christians of our spiritual biography.
That is what we were before we were saved by Jesus versus one to three.
And then what God did for us versus four and following when he saved us.
And so today we're thinking about what God has done for us when he saved us.
We're thinking about the new identity we have in Christ.
and the new position that establishes for us, or is established for us in Christ, a spiritual position, and briefly we'll think a bit about how that helps us.
And of course, as I speak to you, this word was written to Christians.
It's meant to strengthen Christians, teach Christians, equip.
Christians, but if you're here today and you're not a Christian and we're thrilled that you're here.
We're so thankful that you're here.
I hope that you'll hear the wonderful things God does for his people and that you'll embrace the Savior by whom all these things or in whom all these things are found.
So let's pick up the reading and for context sake, let's pick it up at verse 1 and read through verse 7.
This is the holy and inspired Word of God.
And you were dead in the trespasses and sins in which you once walked.
Following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience, among whom we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, carrying out the desires of the body and the mind
and were by nature children of wrath, like the rest of mankind.
But God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which He loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses.
God made us alive together with Christ by grace you have been saved and raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus so that in the coming ages he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
Amen.
What a glorious gospel, let's pray.
Father, we ask that you would enlighten the eyes of our hearts and the knowledge of Christ that we would know, the hope to which you've called us, that we would know the riches of your glorious inheritance in the saints, that we would know something even today of the power
you have exercised toward us.
In Jesus' name we pray, amen.
The Apostle Paul reminds Christians what he's done for them and the union that they have with Jesus and so the new identity they have and the new position they have in him.
We want to think about this.
Decades ago, our family traveled to Ohio where my family
chiefly is to see family and if you go that route on the interstate it takes you right through Effingham, Illinois where I used a credit card to pay for a hotel room for the night and years later a credit report said I was delinquent on a bill to a cell phone company for a purchase made in Effingham.
Well I never bought a cell phone or a cell phone plan in Effingham.
I was
the victim of identity theft.
Something like that has ever happened to you.
You know, the sense of violation, the frustration, probably of paperwork.
the anxiety over your identity and who controls it and who might manipulate it.
And over the years, I think many of us, if we're adults, have received, oh, these notices about data breaches at various companies and it's part of their settlement.
They buy identity theft protection for their customers, which usually will last a couple of years.
By the time it's expired, you've forgotten you had it and don't know you need more.
Well, some people under these kinds of circumstances find they have such difficulty establishing who they say they are.
Somebody presents a false front, they have to go to extraordinary lengths to reestablish the truth about who they are.
And in another sense, identity theft
happens among Christians, and in the church, and it's been happening a long time, many Christians discover that someone has stolen from them their true Christian identity, or they found that other Christians have had their Christian identity, as it were, stolen from them, or they realize they've never really understood the identity that they have as a Christian, or that
Well, they once knew it and then they forgotten it.
What is this identity we have in Christ?
What is this new position into which we are placed?
What does it mean to be in Christ?
It means everything has changed.
It means the old is gone.
The new has come.
What old?
What new?
Well, that's what we just read and we'll think about.
But I just want you to hear this as we approach the passage then.
These things, this new identity and this new position, these aren't things that you acquire over time as a Christian.
These are things that God has bestowed upon you the moment you belong to Christ.
If we are Christians, says Sinclair Ferguson, all of this is true of all of us all the time.
And so let's think about these things.
And let's begin with this.
God gave Christians, you who trust in Christ to be your Lord and Savior.
He's given you a new identity in Christ.
Notice in verses one to three, what you were, what you used to be.
You were dead, he says, verse one, and the trespasses and sins in which he once walked following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit, now working the sons of disobedience, and so forth.
You were, he says, on the one hand, dominated by spiritual death.
In your trespasses, in crossing lines, God said, do not cross.
And in your sins, in falling short of the requirements, God placed upon you, and we all fall short, and we all cross lines, and we were dead spiritually, and we were dominated by the world.
We were just drifting along with the course of this world,
kayak on a river without a paddler going with the flow, following the world in its defiance against God.
Maybe you remember that about yourself.
And you were, Paul says, dominated by the prince of the power of the air, the devil himself, and his minions at work in the sons of disobedience.
And you were dominated.
Did you hear that language by your sinful passions?
and you express the sinful desires, not only of your body, but of your mind.
It's not just that your hands and feet and mouth and private parts worked against God, but even the brain activity, the way that you thought was in defiance of God.
And you were, Paul says, it's very clear doomed.
You were dead, you were disobedience, you were disobedient, you were dominated, and you were
doomed," he says.
We were all, he says, by nature, children of wrath, the sons of wrath.
That is to say God's just wrath was against us.
And we couldn't do anything to help ourselves.
Ben Franklin is not correct in this regard when he says God helps those who help themselves.
No, not in these
matters.
The dead can't bring themselves to life.
The enslaved can't free themselves from their chains, and the condemned can't liberate themselves from their just condemnation.
So is there any good news?
Verse 4, but God.
But God says the apostle.
He did for you what you couldn't do for yourself.
God, He says, rescued you, redeemed you in Christ.
He made you alive together with Christ.
He raised you with Christ.
He seated you in the heavenlies with Christ.
Whatever all that means, it will get to it.
But do you see this?
You couldn't seat yourself in the heavenly places.
You couldn't raise yourself into the heavenlies, nor could you give yourself life.
For you were dead.
But God did.
these things.
And he took you out of Adam, so to speak, and put you into Christ.
We spoke of this months ago, once ago, we talked about Adam and how he fell and provoked God's just condemnation and how we are all humanity.
Paul calls us by nature, children of earth, we are all.
in Adam fallen in Adam and justly deserving God's displeasure by nature.
That is what we are.
But God is gracious.
And He takes us out of fallen Adam and He places us into faithful Christ where Adam failed.
Christ succeeded where Adam disobeyed Christ, obeyed.
Adam didn't love God, and he didn't love his neighbor as himself, but Christ loved God with all of his heart, soul, mind, and strength all the time.
And he loved his neighbor, even his enemies, as he loved himself, laid down his life for sinners.
And so we have this new identity in Christ.
He says, we're in Christ, we're with Christ, we're bound to Him, we're united to Him, and we are the beloved children of God.
Some months ago we saw this new identity in Christ illustrated in a variety of ways in Scripture, and I just mentioned that covenantal way.
Covenantally, Adam was our representative head, but now in the new covenant by Grace, Christ is our representative head.
But we also see this in a variety of ways and Ephesians, and if you'll bear with me, some of you were with us, and it was so long ago.
But he mentions here in Ephesians a whole variety of ways in which we are bound to Christ, and he illustrates it.
For instance, in chapter 1, we saw that Christ is the head, and the church is his body.
The head and the body are in union with one another.
Wherever the head goes, the body goes.
I illustrated that.
by my wrestling experience, and now my 10-year-old son and I when we wrestle, he always talks about, control the head.
Control the head, where the head goes, there goes the body.
Well, that's true.
Well, we're also in union with Christ, as Paul describes it, later in chapter two, like a building is in union with its foundation, Christ, the chief cornerstone of that foundation.
The church, he says, rises like
a building stacking floor upon floor generation after generation as it grows and expands and more and more come into this kingdom of Christ, this building, this temple which sits securely on a solid rock Christ, the cornerstone, without which there would be no stability and no security and there could be no growth.
And we'll see later in chapter 5
when we get there and I don't even have the faintest idea how long it's going to be before we do.
But we're going to see he describes this union between believers in Christ like the union in marriage of a husband and wife.
The two become one flesh and everything to have is shared.
So also in our spiritual union Christ, the bridegroom marries
the church, his bride, and everything is shared.
We bring to the party our sin.
He brings every spiritual blessing from God.
And then there's that famous teaching in John 15 where Jesus says, I am the vine, and you are the branches.
So we have our life from him.
We receive as it were sap from him, hydration
and nutrients without which the branch cannot bloom, cannot grow, cannot live."
So do you see?
Anyone who's in Christ, the old is gone, the new has come.
Oh, Christians, here's your application.
Don't forget this.
Don't lose sight of this.
anybody mix you up about these things.
Don't be robbed of this identity you have in Jesus.
Now, notice that with this new identity, we have a new spiritual position, we might call it, and I want you to see that in verses four to six.
Notice, but God being rich in mercy because of the great love with what you loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, He made us alive together with Christ by grace you've been saved.
And he raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ.
And Paul is so astounded by the reality of this.
And as it were at a loss for words to describe this spectacular thing God has done, he can't find the right words to talk about it.
He actually coins
three new words.
He brings them into being.
I suppose, well, maybe you do this.
I think I do this.
I don't, you know, former President George Bush did this on various occasions.
Nuclear, remember that?
He could say nuclear for nuclear.
I don't know if he was the first, but a different way of suppressing yourself.
My wife gets after me and for expressing that
southern isomer, maybe it's an Arkansas thing, 101 Dalmatians?
Yeah, it's 100 dead, right?
Paul coins three terms because he finds no ordinary words adequate here.
He brings together words and the three words he makes are, and they're just one word and it takes, in some cases, four words in English
But it's just one word made alive together with, raised together with, and made to sit together with.
That is, he's thinking about Jesus who was resurrected, ascended, and now sits at the right hand of the majesty on high.
And Paul smashes the word together with three things to describe us.
What happened to us, we have been made spiritually alive.
We have been raised or ascended into the heavenlies.
We have been seated with Christ so that whatever those things mean, the apostles saying what belongs to Jesus belongs to you.
What's true of Him is true of you who believe in Him, you who are bound to Him.
that God united you to the Christ who lived and died and rose and ascended and is seated and is coming again and you with him have lived and died and been buried and raised and ascended and seated.
So that what happened to Jesus was not merely for you as glorious as it is.
But that what happened to Jesus has also in God's economy happened to you in Jesus.
And now because we have this new identity and this new position in Christ, we could have a new posture towards our old life.
Before our redemption, we were subject to enslaved to three enemies, the world, the flesh and the devil.
to put shorthand to verses one to three.
The world is set against God, the devil likewise of course, in our own sinful nature and desire set also against God.
And while Paul here in Ephesians two doesn't spell things out for us, this new identity and new position does become important as we think about a new posture Christians can have.
towards the world and the flesh of the devil.
And we're going to explore that in just a bit and for just a bit.
But what I want you to see is this new identity and new position that enables a new posture.
And I want you to see here to be fair to the Apostle Paul and to you.
Paul doesn't spell these things out here.
He doesn't touch on some things I'm going to touch on at the very end.
He doesn't say boo about
what you ought to do in light of this teaching.
He doesn't tell you to do anything.
His focus is what God has already done for you.
And next week, Lord willing, get to this passage in verse 7 again, and our focus will be on, why did God do that?
Why did He do it?
Well, motivated Him.
What was His end game?
We can't even get there today.
But Paul simply wants you, your Christian, to embrace the truth he's teaching.
Not what you do in light of that truth, but just embrace the truth.
Now you will need to apply this.
Eventually we'll get there in the book.
But in applying it, the Apostle Paul knows that we will have many failures in our application.
and piling up your failures can make you feel defeated and make you feel that the truth isn't actually true about you.
But it is true.
And the Apostle Paul says it's true.
It's founded upon Christ, not upon your Christian living.
It's founded upon the success of Jesus, not on your spiritual achievement.
Paul doesn't even connect the two things here.
He doesn't jump.
from what God did for you to, here's what you should do for God.
I'm belaboring the point because I want to be clear on that.
I want you to be clear on that.
What God has done for us and what God has done in us is connected with what God will do through us as we live it out.
They are inseparable, but they are distinguishable.
And if we don't distinguish them, we may be tempted to doubt the glory of God's truth because our experience of living out the truth hasn't yet attained to the perfection of the saints now in heaven and the glory which is yet to come for us.
And measuring the perfection of God's truth based on the imperfection of your use of that truth will take you down the road of disappointment and doubt.
If you read God's faithfulness to His truth based on the strength of your faith in that truth, you'll always be doubting because you are not God and because you are not yet glorified and perfected so that navel gazing at your continued imperfections can distract your eyes from gazing at the perfection of Christ and the perfection you have in Christ.
and you lose sight of what Paul has for you here.
But praise God, God's grace is greater than all our sin, and His truth is more sure than our, let's say it, mediocre appreciation and application of it.
So you have a new identity, you have a new spiritual position, whatever it means, however it works itself out, the fact that you are United of Christ means Christ lived and you lived in Christ.
Christ died, and Christ was buried, and Christ was raised, and Christ is ascended, and Christ is seated, and you are likewise in Him."
You know the story of the ugly duckling?
There's an old song sung by Danny Cade.
Well, that is, but some of you do.
It's the story of a self-conscious little
duckling mixed up with other birds, and he's feeling very sorry for himself because of his feathers all stubby and brown.
He was despised by his fellow birds, and he felt like a failure, especially when he saw their comparative beauty.
And then one day the ugly duckling looked down into the water and saw something marvelous.
He no longer had brown ugly feathers.
swan and off he went shouting, I'm a swan.
I'm a swan.
Just like that.
He thought he was a duckling, but he was actually a swan.
Sinclair Ferguson sums it up.
The real difference for him came when he saw what he really was.
The recognition of his new identity was the beginning of a new joy.
And the mistake we make, many of us make, is to just look at our sand and look at our failure and then ask despairingly, what can I do?
But our need is not to do, says the Apostle Paul, it is first of all to understand what God has done to see what He's made us through His Son, to see that whether we're a man or a woman or a boy or a girl, we have
in Christ, died with Christ to sin's dominion, and have been raised with Christ to newness of life.
We belong to another world and another king, like the ugly duckling.
We can say, I'm not under the dominion of sin.
This world is not my home.
I am not the devil's toy.
I am a new creature in Christ.
I am not what I thought I was, and I am not what I once was.
I'm not an ugly, duckling Christian.
I'm a beautiful child of God.
I think a lot of us would be helped if we started our day that way.
With that mindset rooted in the truth.
Now, having said all that, I do want you to point
I do want to point you to some ways this will later in the book be made more explicit.
Some ways this helps transform our Christian living.
The fact that we're already alive risen and ascended.
It means something about the battles we still face in this fallen world with the world, the flesh and the devil.
Let me take these three things we are in Christ in turn and just
Stir your thinking.
God made us alive together with Christ.
You saw that verse five.
He made us alive by grace we've been saved.
God did it, we couldn't do it for ourselves.
We sing that wonderful hymn, amazing grace.
I once was lost, but now I'm found, was blind, but now I see.
Somebody should write a stanza.
I once was dead, but now I live.
And that's true.
What difference does that make?
a lot.
In chapter 4 we might say this, Paul says, I say in testifying, the Lord that you must no longer walk as the Gentiles do, they are alienated from the life of God.
But you're not, you're reconciled to God and you're alive in Christ.
But they are alienated.
And that is not the way you learned Christ, he says.
You were taught in him to put off your old self, which belongs to your former manner of life.
and is corrupt through deceitful desires.
And to be renewed in the spirit of your mind and to put on the new self created in the likeness of God and true righteousness and holiness.
Because you are alive in Christ, he says, learn to live in light of the new life you have in Christ.
That'll mean something when you deal with you.
and the remaining corruption of sin that lives in you.
And then secondly, God raised us up with Christ.
You saw that verse six.
He raised us up with him.
Now this language of being raised up, some of you might wonder at some of my expressions, is not here a reference to Christ's resurrection, but rather to Christ's ascension.
Christ was raised to life out of the tomb and then he was raised up out of this world and ascended into the heavenlies wherever they are.
ESV says places but that's not actually the term used.
The heavenlies is the term used but it's not so much about geography is the point but it is about spiritual reality
and the reality that Christ ascended out of this world into the heavenlies to sit at the right hand of the majesty on high, and in him we have a position that is likewise not of this world.
We belong now in a different expression.
We belong out of the kingdom of heaven and not to the kingdoms of this world.
We no longer belong to the kingdom of darkness, to the kingdom of light.
Our citizenship is in heaven.
This world is not our home.
And because of this, the Apostle Paul will say that we should live differently in this world.
In chapter five, at one time you were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord.
Walk as children of light for the fruit of light is found in all that is good and right and true.
But you know how it is as a Christian walking in
among the kingdoms of this world, there are so many things that can make you feel like you're at the bottom.
Things that wear you down, people that put you down in the world lets you down, right?
How do you, as a Christian, work a dead-end job?
That's the job you have.
It's going nowhere.
There's no promotion beyond this job.
How do you work that job?
How do you suffer through the incompetence of others?
How do you live through a failing body and a failing mind?
How do you live in retirement when there's a economic financial pinch?
How do you do any of these things and more without throwing in the towel?
How do you live in this world and not say, fine, I've had enough, I quit.
You win.
You remember that this world is not your home.
You are not ultimately under the pile.
You are ascended with Christ.
And you are a citizen of a kingdom not of this world.
You're a citizen of heaven.
And thirdly, what does this all suggest to us?
Well, the truth is
God has seated us together with Christ in the heavenly.
We are bound up with Him as a bride to her husband as a body to its head.
We are bound up with Him in His victorious enthronement.
Paul in Ephesians 1 says of him, God raised him from the dead and seated him at the right hand in the heavenly places, far above all rule and authority and power and dominion.
And above every name that can be named, not only in this age, but in the one to come.
That's Christ.
And we, Paul said, are no longer under the dominion of Satan
We are no longer in the kingdom of the enemy, belonging to it, enslaved and bound.
Once we were under his power and we could not free ourselves.
But we have been translated out of the kingdom of darkness and into the kingdom of God's beloved Son.
That doesn't make the devil not real.
It doesn't make the devil not active and active against God's people in his church, but it does mean you are seated with Christ far above all rule and authority and power and dominion and all the cosmic forces of evil because you were bound with Christ who is far above all those
No wonder when Paul gets to spiritual warfare in this book in chapter 6, he says to us, not run from the devil, but stand, stand firm.
He says, finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his bite, put on the whole armor of God.
So you're in a battle and you need armor, but that you might be able to stand against the schemes of the devil.
It's not that we're not in a war.
But it's not against flesh and blood.
It's against spiritual forces arrayed against God and His people.
But our ultimate victory is not in doubt because we are already seated with Christ far above these cosmic powers and spiritual forces of evil.
It's just a hint of what's happening here.
Think of the security of the saints in Christ.
But think how this helps you here as another put it.
and at a bit of length.
And so Paul is saying, no matter what is going on in your life right now, dear Christian, that you think defines your life irretrievably.
No matter what you've gone through, no matter how demoralizing it may have been, no matter how hard or bitter or painful it may be, you need to see that there are three events that are bigger than those events.
And those three events define who you are, more importantly than the place where you were born or the school where you were educated or the friendships you developed or the vocation you've gone into or the services you now render.
Here's what defines you.
You've been raised from the dead into spiritual life.
You're no longer in bondage to sin.
You've ascended with Christ
into the heavenlies, and this world is not your home, and you have been seated with Christ who is far above all rule and power and authority and name in this life and in the next.
That's who you are.
Do you know who you are?
Well, what to make it so?
Let's pray.
Father, grant us a
strength of confidence that we have not yet had in what you have done for us in Jesus.
In His name I pray.
Amen.
Let's stand together and sing.